[Music]
e
welcome to Canada's most irreverent talk
show this is the Andrew Len show brought
to you by True
[Music]
North hello and welcome to you all
Canada's most irreverent talk show here
the Andrew lton show on True North on
this Wednesday March 27th sometimes you
need to break through the midweek
doldrums hopefully this show will help
you do exactly that although I must
admit I got very much sidetracked this
morning we've still prepped the show out
we've still booked it I've still planned
everything and researched and all of
that but I I learned I don't know maybe
like 90 minutes ago or so of this
program I had never heard of calledo s n
o and it is is a an AI so AI is all the
rage now you can do AI generated news uh
AI generated words content writing AI
generated photos AI generated videos and
this was the first time I heard of AI
generated music now people have used
chat gbt which is one of the AI programs
to come up with lyrics and quite frankly
if you listen to most of the crappy
songs that are put out now ai generated
is generally better than you know a song
with one line about you know doing
unspeakable things to people's bodies
that's basically pop radio now but this
app which was like free uh you could
they only got a certain number of
credits which I burned through in like
half an hour this morning when I wasn't
working you could make songs and I was
like all right let's actually just have
some fun with this so I I decided to
play around and and see if this could
come up with a a theme song for True
North and this is what we
got
chaoses through St we see through the
light all this on the
beac beac of light I like
it true we
do all right here's the
chorus out
the uncovering the darkness they will
rise with uning contion they will
fight
so
shining all right then it's just you
know an exit it's just a little guitar
solo at the end there which normally I
would never cut out the guitar solo
except in this case it's not a real
person playing it is a an AI that is AI
generated so uh that is the new true nor
we're not actually adopting it but the
new True North theme song voices of
Truth which I quite like and I think I
gave it like a oneline prompt of I just
give it like an energetic Rock ballad
about the Canadian media organization
true north and this is what we got
honest journalism a beacon of light True
North strong shining so bright well
that's lovely but you we can't all just
go to jingles and that stuff you have to
have some fun with a program like this
so I thought it might be good might be
to get a song about Canada's prime
minister now we could do any we could do
a song about the carbon tax we could do
a song about snc lavelin we could do a
song called experiencing it differently
although I don't know what rhymes with
experiencing it different what rhymes
with experiencing it differently yeah I
don't know potently and see I couldn't
count this is why we we leave it to AI
so this is the song that we landed on oh
dear old Jus charm and Grace to beloved
by his Canadian base but a tail
resurfaces causing quite a stir
apartments in black face so how the
rumors blur in a world of cancel culture
where mistakes never
cease our man trudo tries to find some
peace he apologizes but the damage is
done a spotlight on his past
overshadowing the f
oh
dear what you black your
reputation but let's not forget oh let's
not ignore that people can grow and
change so that was I it sounded like Al
Jolson doing it although to be honest I
could actually picture Justin Trudeau
doing that song himself in one of his
old outfits that is it's called a
Canadian our colleague arom says that
should be the new outro music for the no
no no we don't want to make that the
outro music I actually got now now now
everyone on the show is just making
requests uh Sean's asking if I can like
get one in the style of Cole Porter so
well basically anything goes which is
you know one of the great Cole Porter
shows that's basically Justin Trudeau's
government as it is in olden days the
glimpse of talking was looked on to
something shocking but now God knows
anything go that's basically Trudeau's
whole approach right now where anything
goes although it's finally catching up
with him with the poll numbers we've
been talking about over the last I our
numbers probably just plummeted when I
started singing although believe it or
not I have I have actually performed
before not well uh but my my friend tal
Bachman who's the the Fantastic singer
songwriter uh he was doing a musical
night on the markstein cruise and he's
invited me to sing along with him a
couple of times so performed with I'll
say rock loyalt rock loyalty no Rock
royalty in Canada see I should just get
AI to generate the show and we'll go
from there uh Sean is asking if tal
Bachman's related to Michelle Bachmann
no uh he has she has two NS on Bachman
he has won although believe it or not I
have sung with her as well we sang on a
previous Cruise Sway in the style of
Michael bé so there you go you're
learning all sorts of stuff about me on
the Andrew Len show today have to start
off on a fun note although I we have a
little something planned for the end of
the show we'll get to on that as well
but I don't think it beats the Al Jolson
Justin Trudeau number there but uh let's
talk about the liberal government in
freefall here as I mentioned their poll
numbers have not been favorable the uh
polls are showing at the very least a
massive conservative majority but more
importantly reducing the Liberals to
some polls are saying third party in
some ways it might conceivably end up
where they are the fourth party behind
the NDP and the block kbec W but what's
fascinating about this is the way they
behave there's a particular amount of
hubris we're seeing and one example of
this comes from Ken Hardy who is a
British Columbia liberal Member of
Parliament who is kind of like the mark
garritson of Twitter I mean I guess Mark
garritson is the mark garritson of
Twitter but he's very Mark Garrison
likee in that he just spends his time
saying these ridiculous and absurd
things online now unlike garrettson
Hardy will get called on it we'll
apologize for it and then we'll do the
same thing a little bit later on in
particular one of the things he loves
doing is comparing Pier POV and the
conservatives to Nazis now this is a
tweet this is the original tweet so not
the one from this week this is the
original tweet where uh Ken Hardy says
if Joseph gobbles can pick up question
period down there he will be so proud of
conservatives spouting a lie often
enough and loudly enough it is a tried
and true tactic spouting multitudes of
them the Tories have perfected this this
is Ken iy Joseph Gobles the Nazi
propagandas one of the most horrific
people of that era of history and Ken
Hardy is just making that comparison
rather freely it's the old line Godwin's
law that all internet arguments will
eventually devolve into an invocation of
Hitler uh invoking Hitler is kind of the
starting point for uh people like Ken
Hardy now he apologized for this this
was him in the house of
comments yes Mr Speaker uh I did go
elbows up on Twitter and I apologize for
that uh I did though attempt to raise
the issue the other day of the frequent
misrepresentation uh coming from the
conservative side but elbows up was a
little too much in this case and I do
apologize so he gets called on it he
apologizes we're all supposed to believe
that everything is fine everything is
fair game here
and then we see this tweet from him just
this week he references the previous
controversy now I got into a bit of
trouble a while back by invoking an
awful historical figure when pointing
out Pier pv's use of the big lie
strategy but oh no he he went he did the
butt but day by day there's more and
more proof that this is exactly what he
does because he doesn't have much else
to offer so once again we have have Ken
Hardy again aware of this aware of the
previous controversy saying yeah I know
I said it and I know I apologize for it
but every day it's seeming more and more
appropriate now Melissa lanman who is a
she's been on the show before she's the
deputy leader of the conservatives she
is a very prominent and outspoken member
of the Jewish Community as well uh the
type of person who is as a result I
think particularly sensitive to Nazism
and Nazi comparisons now Melissa lansman
herself you may recall during the
freedom cont
was accused by Justin trau of standing
with swastikas or standing with people
who wave swastikas whatever his line was
she jumped on Ken Ken Hardy's comments
here and I wanted to share that with you
she says does this guy have no one in
his life that will tell him to stop
invoking Nazis especially now are you
serious Ken Hardy I'm glad I won't have
to sit in a room with you after the next
election I'm sure there are a few of
your colleagues who feel the same way
after this tweet read the room and she's
referring of course to the the fact that
Ken Hardy is likely to be Ed uh next
year his writing uh he carried it pretty
decisively the last couple of Elections
but it's historically been conservative
and if you look at some of the polling
numbers in and around BC I think he's in
the Sur area it's particularly not
hospitable to the liberals so he's
apologized once again sort
of some folks object to my invoking
unsavory past figures when noting Pierre
Pav's habit of lying okay I apologize as
for the widespread view that he lies
well some free advice from Cicero oh
he's Dro dropping another historical
figure now when people speak ill of you
live so that none would believe them so
I feel he just like yeah Sean is saying
it's very cryptic I feel he just like
searched for a quote about lying and he
basically just used an AI generated
tweet machine for that I think uh he he
actually actually I should what I should
have done I should have gotten Ken
Hardy's tweet done as a song maybe I'll
do that for tomorrow's anytime K because
would be more entertaining to listen to
Ken Hardy in some AI generated pop
ballot rather than some AI generated
Member of Parliament talking but uh that
is basically his approach here he's
gonna call Pierre pev a senior Nazi
apologize reference it do it again
apologize again uh so basically we just
need in Ken Hardy's office like one of
those old factory things if it's been
zero days since our last accident it's
been zero days since our last Nazi
reference and you won't even need to buy
a lot of numbers because you're probably
not going to get more more than one or
two days before he does it again at the
rate that he's going absolutely absurd
and what we're seeing here though is a
very desperate Liberal Party now look
there are always going to be some people
in caucus that are a bit more outspoken
that are a bit prone to foot and mouth
disorder but uh what we see here is that
when the Liberals are as desperate as
they are they go I mean they literally
go Nazi they that's the line that they
go to with conservatives are na
because they genuinely believe it and
this is the problem we hear all the time
from people like Justin trau for example
about the need to reins civility in
politics and we need to build Bridges we
need to work across the aisle all of
that and where is that attitude where is
that desire to be conciliatory and
magnanimous when you have liberal MPS
that are accusing people of being Nazi
propagandist because they disagree with
them about the carbon tax it is an
absurd abs ABD development here yet it's
the kind of thing that they get a pass
on now Ken Hardy look he he's not a
senior member of the liberal caucus by
any stretch he's not a cabinet minister
but he is I I don't think saying
anything that he doesn't truly believe
and and that's the most important Point
here is that we're not talking about
someone who made some errant slip of the
tongue in a debate we all get heated we
all say things that maybe we wish we
could take back we're talking about
someone who is being very transparent
about what it is that he genuinely
believes what it is that he thinks of
conservatives and you expect
conservatives or I mean do let me back
up and say it another way do you expect
people to reach across the aisle and
work with folks who think they are
Nazis so it's only people on the right
that tend to be criticized for not being
as collaborative and Cooperative people
say oh well Pier PV he he's just a name
caller he doesn't have a plan well he's
not the one calling people a Nazi
because he disagrees with them this is I
mean there's that old meme that's been
circulating for I don't know how old it
is but for a few years right now there's
a meme that's been circulating where uh
it's basically the fake cover of a
children's book and it's you know
everyone I don't like is Hitler or
everyone I dislike is Hitler and that's
basically the liberal campaign platform
in this country it's just if you don't
like them they are Hitler they're Nazis
they're far-right they're going to you
know do XY Z and
historically you've had a media in this
country that I think is willing to adopt
this language at least in part willing
to adopt the language at least in part
now I I wanted to turn to uh the again
we have to talk about the carbon tax
because everyone on the internet
everyone in the country seems to be
talking about this because it is coming
into effect the increase is coming into
effect on Monday a 23% hike in the
carbon tax uh which is adding insult
injury for Canadians who are already
grappling with rising cost of living
you're going to see instantly an
increase in the cost of fuel and you'll
also see the trickle down increases in
the cost of groceries the cost of your
gas bill and all the like but one of the
things that I will point out about this
is that the Liberals have not listen to
anyone they don't want to listen to
anyone they are purely ideological on
this now Justin Trudeau has been faced
with mounting criticism from Premier not
just conservatives from Premier from
provincial Party leaders saying saying
we've got to give people some release we
that we just can't deal with this he
sent a letter to premiers a letter to
premieres thanking them for raising the
issue of Canada's carbon pricing system
he says our government is acutely aware
of the increasing Financial pressure
facing Canadians we know that we want we
they want to make life more affordable
this is what we're doing this is why we
made this Revenue neutral uh he claims
that the Parliamentary budget officer
has confirmed that which is by the way
simply untrue parliamentary budget
officer has not given any con uh
confirmation of that whatsoever and it
goes on and on but then here is the
kicker of this he says since Canada's
carbon pricing system was first
introduced in 2019 we have made it clear
that we are open to working with any and
all provinces and territories that want
to establish their own pricing systems
as long as they meet or exceed the
national Benchmark British Columbia
Quebec and Northwest Territories
continue to operate their own system and
are not subject to the federal back stop
when we engaged with you in 22 all 2022
all of your governments either did not
propose alternative systems or propose
systems that didn't meet the minimum
standards so he's saying well uh it's
your fault because you haven't come up
with your own alternative except the
problem is provinces have very little
latitude and autonomy because there is a
federal minimum so the only latitude
provinces have is to actually come up
with a higher carbon tax than what the
Fed federal government is doing so
Justin Trudeau is taking aim at
provinces he's blaming provincial
governments to we can take that down now
he's blaming provincial government
unless it's already down and I'm just
seeing it on my screen as a hold over
from when it was up so don't mind me uh
but thank you we we can see uh what
Justin Trudeau is doing here he is
blaming other provin blaming other
leaders blaming provinces for not coming
up with ideas when he has literally been
the reason that provinces do not have
the ability to come up with their own
climate plans because the government has
said you have to have this minimum
standard and I forget what the dollar
value is but it's the one that keeps
going up and is increasing yet again on
Monday so it it's a particular level of
brazenness here and shamelessness i'
would also say to look at provinces and
Premier as the problem they are supposed
to be members of Confederation that have
not quite equal kind of equal standing
there's supposed to be partners in
Confederation Partners in the Federation
of Canada but Justin trau has decided to
uh basically kick federalism to the curb
and tell the provinces it's his way or
the highway and then turn around and
blame them for inexplicably not being
able to do something that he has not
allowed them to do a and this is why we
have I I think increasingly frustrations
from people that have previously gone
along with it or even people who are at
their core on board with the idea of a
carbon tax but Justin turdo has a number
of positions on on this that just don't
seem to align with the reality he says
that this is a market based he basically
says it's a market based product which I
I simply don't get
altogether and we also have the idea
that he is claiming it's Revenue neutral
which again is not entirely clear and
it's certainly not Revenue neutral for
individual Canadians who are ending up
in in many cases spending more on this
than they're receiving despite
government's claims to the contrary and
it's perhaps why you see this issue
being weaponized politically by Pierre
PV who's going around the country having
rallies with hundreds or thousands of
people depending on where he is in the
country uh all rallied around this idea
of Spike the hike axe the tax whatever
the rhyming scheme is he's using in any
given protest there was a great piece in
the financial post by our friend Ross
mckitrick who is a professor of
Economics at the University of wealth
wanted a Federal leader who will be
honest about climate policy uh Ross
mckitrick joins us once again Ross
always good to talk to you thanks for
coming on
today you are muted there or maybe I'm
muted no you're
muted yeah I'm not able to to hear you
Ross hopefully we'll get that sorted out
in a moment uh but one of the things
that I find fascinating here is that the
liberal government and I I'll just pluck
from Ross's point on this in the column
he says the conservatives would rely on
the heavy hand of government through
regulation and subsidies to pick winners
and losers in the economy as opposed to
trusting the market and this is a
complete rejection of the reality which
is that his program insists on heavy
regulations the emission reduction plan
has 240 pages of regulations subsidies
mandates and winner picking grants and
he is saying that his product is simple
his program is simple it's the
conservative one that's going to be
causing all of those problems so this is
where you see this weird sort of
Illusion work that's being done by the
government on this now uh sometimes you
get leaders like Steven Gilbo who are
remarkably transparent about this they
just want this punitive heavy-handed
approach that targets what they believe
is the great culprit of climate change
but Justin trau tries to have the best
of both worlds on one hand he tries to
pretend that this is this a minimally
disruptive Revenue neutral thing I mean
the line they've been committing to in
the last little is oh you're all better
off with it you're all making more money
you are better off with the carbon tax
you you're profiting from this and then
you have Canadians saying well it sure
doesn't look like that you know my price
of gas is going up and uh and if it is
actually the case that most people are
getting their money back then what's the
point of the whole thing so it doesn't
actually really incentivize the behavior
the government is trying to incentivize
or purporting to incentivize and the
reason for that is that so many of these
emitting activi are not optional for
Canadians driving to work for a lot of
Canadians is not optional picking your
kids up from school is not optional
going to the grocery store to buy food
not optional so where are you supposed
to cut back we I believe we have Ross
mckin back on the line now Ross uh good
to talk to you here what is it you feel
is really the the misdirection taking
place here where the government is
saying on one hand that this is not a
heavy-handed regulatory process on its
part um well the the comment that I made
in my oped was that um it's one thing
for Trudeau to say we believe in the
economic principles of efficient climate
policy but his actual policies are
anything but he's um yes he's got this
elegant little carbon tax going but the
real costs of his policy are all the
other regulations the clean fuel
standard the EV mandate the building
Energy Efficiency codes all these other
regulations massively increased
the costs of his climate policy so um
the carbon tax itself it's costly
there's no question about it but there's
actually much worse stuff in his policy
mix and and he was talking as if none of
that is there now on the conservative
side it's legitimate for them to point
people to the high cost of the climate
policy but uh what they need to do is
say well how explain how can they be
committed to things like the Paris
treaty and the net zero
goals without actually planning to incur
any costs of of meeting them that
doesn't square up so um what I'd like is
for some politician somewhere to be
honest with the public and either say
we're going to do this and it's going to
cost a fortune so just get used to it or
say okay we've heard from the public
that there's an upper limit to what
they're willing to pay this is the most
we can hope to accomplish and we'll
stick with that
yeah I think that's a valid point on on
all fronts because it's easy to Target
and certainly for political reasons I
understand why you target the consumer
carbon tax that retail carbon tax that
you see that's a line item on your gas
bill that uh you see buried in the price
of of fuel for example but even I mean
if we look at what the Alberta
Government did under Jason Kenny where
they said let's go after the industrial
side of things that makes a a very much
more convoluted and as you're saying
their complex process and there's still
doing in effect one of the same things
but it's a lot more opaque how it's
happening sure yeah when uh when they
don't like taking heat from consumers
and they say well we'll make industry
pay I think by now everybody realizes uh
that's just a shell game it all ends up
for the consumer one way or the other uh
it's either buried in the price that you
pay at the pump in the case of gas um or
you you pay it directly out of your own
pocket but there's uh as Economist as
economics textbooks always say costs can
be shifted around but they can't be
avoided so what is the I I mean just
from an economics perspective here let
let's just say that we agree with the
core premise and we agree with the core
goal which is debatable on how much we
need to reduce emissions by what is from
your perspective the path that a
government should take to do that if
that is it its stated objective here
well if it wants to meet the Paris
Target and then go from there down to
some kind of Net Zero Target uh later in
the century we would uh to get to Paris
I would estimate we'd need maybe uh $200
a ton carbon tax and then uh to get to
Net Zero um something more like a $500 a
ton carbon tax I'm not sure even that
would do it and um so
uh the uh the current policy mix that we
have even the federal liberal policy mix
W I don't think it'll get us to the
Paris Target it certainly won't get us
to to Net Zero beyond that but that's a
conversation that no one's having that I
mean none of the political leaders are
willing to talk to people about the
costs of what they're proposing to do so
and that I guess gets at what I was
hoping to touch on here which is that
this commitment itself is boxing Us in
in effect like there's no way to get to
that without some sort of really
aggressive plan that that even the
conservative who I mean again to be fair
to critics of Pier PV he has not he has
committed to this he has committed to
Paris he has not talked about changing
the core
Target right and so there's an
incoherency there
because uh he's justified in in saying
to people look we we hear you the cost
of fuel is too high cost of living is
too high all these policies are are um
are driving up the cost of living in
unacceptable ways
um but there's no magic alternative if
at the same time you're going to remain
committed to hitting the Paris targets
so um if for instance they think that
you can get rid of the carbon tax and
there'll be a whole bunch of far cheaper
ways of doing it then they're wrong and
that is not the case um and people have
tried including past conservative
governments and it just doesn't work one
of the the challenges and a lot of the
green energy activists I I find are
guilty of this where they commit to
policies and that are based on
technologies that don't really exist yet
or don't do what they say they're going
to do but I I also feel that a lot of
people that try to say market-based
Solutions are the solution are also
doing the same thing because you you
even mentioned at the bottom of your
piece there you know yeah maybe there's
a technology that will come along that
will change the math on this but right
now that hasn't
happened um yeah so and that's exactly
the point that given the current
technology that we have um we're fairly
Limited in what we can do and um we
don't know maybe a new technology will
come along five years or 10 years from
now the key is if you can um if you can
uh decouple emissions from combustion
basically if you can find a way to burn
fossil fuels without releasing CO2 we've
decoupled lots of other emissions from
combustion we've decoupled sulfur
dioxide and carbon monoxide and lots of
other types of um lots of other types of
emissions from combustion but there's no
technology that does that for CO2 at
least not yet as far as we know now how
much of of a of a because the government
says it is looking at that as well and
they say that all of these uh Solutions
are going to be part of the overall plan
but but how much have they actually
committed to R&D on that or is it really
just left industry to come up with it on
its own
uh I think that uh
um I think there is some some um uh
funding for that kind of research much
more in other countries I mean Canada is
not a big player in research in any case
but um sure people are thinking about it
working on it but um there's no easy
answer for it so um uh because of that
um you know it's right now it's kind of
a lot of talk but um there
uh as far as I know there's people have
been thinking about it for 50 years and
there hasn't been any breakthrough on it
so it's not like put a billion dollars
up and someone's going to figure it out
right now all we have is carbon capture
and storage which is very limited in its
applicability we uh we lost your video
there but as it happens we're coming to
the end of our time anyway so if it's
going to happen that's the best moment
for it uh Ross mckitrick from the
University of G great piece in the
financial post wanted a Federal leader
who will be honest about climate policy
hopefully you'll get your wish there
thank you very much thanks Andrew good
talking to you all right thank you that
was well Ross mckitrick you can even see
on the screen there RM uh one thing I
will say on this is that you can't I
mean dilithium crystals I believe was
the old star Tre you can't base your
policy on things that don't exist yet
and a lot of people have all of these
great Ambitions about oh solar will do
this and wind will do this and they just
don't and the Really efficient ineffect
or efficient and effect Ive and clean
sources of energy that we do have like
uh for example nuclear they never seem
to want to talk about so uh with that
we'll I'm sure revisit this uh as we get
closer to uh the weekend and then big uh
big uh protests are going to be on
Monday and I think we just learned this
morning Pier PV he'll be doing his own
rally in Nimo but there are protests in
uh Lloyd Miner outside Alberta Ottawa
the Toronto all over the place so uh do
send in your footage of those uh wanted
to shift gears here uh to healthcare the
other HW button issue now this is such
an infuriating one for so many people
because virtually every Canadian who's
had some exposure with the health care
system has experienced something that
didn't work the way it was or the way
they thought it was supposed to whether
it is uh cases of people being treated
in hallways people who have been on
waiting list for months and months and
months to see a specialist not to
mention to you know actually be treated
by that specialist so we all defend the
ideal of the Health Care system in
Canada but not the application of it so
how do we get to that ideal or is it
that our core expectation is flawed well
one of the things that's quite
interesting and I'm actually surprised
to see this is that most Canadians would
be open to and welcome major changes to
the Health Care System there was a lege
survey of 2,000 Canadian adults that's
quite a large sample size for a poll of
this nature the found Healthcare ranks
among the top three priorities for
politicians and that 2third of those
respondents said they wanted significant
changes to the system uh now these
obviously have in in some cases come up
against challenges in the courts uh most
recently the surgic the cambi surgical
case in British Columbia which I'm sure
we can talk about in this context but
let's just talk about what Canadians
want here and what's standing in the way
joining me is Council for the Canadian
Constitution Foundation Josh deaz Josh
good to have you back on the show this
is a little bit encouraging briging I
must say it was a pleasant surprise to
see this because so often this is
treated as just this third rail
political issue that you're not allowed
to do anything with yeah absolutely so
in one sense it's you know really bad
news because Canadians see a health care
uh system that's in crisis but what I
did find encouraging is the fact that
Canadians are saying they're ready for
major change so like you said 2third say
they want major change and only 5% of
people actually say that they want to do
the thing that uh you most often hear in
the media which is you know just throw
more Public Funding at this problem
right so uh people are are presented
with those options more public just more
Public Funding or some major change and
everyone is basically saying we want
major change and uh one really
interesting part of this too was it was
count kind of counterintuitive to us at
the CCF but women in particular are
saying that they are worried about the
Health Care system and want major change
72% of women surveyed said that they
think the Health Care system is going to
be worse for future Generations if we
don't get those major changes and that
was a lot higher than men and we're
trying to figure out why that was but uh
we we think the reason might be that
women just make a lot more of the health
care decisions they do a lot more of the
sort of caregiving and so that might
explain uh why they're more worried
about it simply because they you know
interact with the system a lot more you
you you have in this country a a
relatively small group of activists that
care very much about the structure of
the system like Canadian doctors for
Medicare for example but most Canadians
I feel care more about outcomes uh and
you look at some of the priorities that
were listed here uh 46% say uh they want
more family doctors as a top priority uh
shorter emergency room weight times was
behind that shorter times for common
surgeries and other treatments those
have nothing to do with who delivers it
with how they access it those are just
out comes those are things that people
want and and I believe that if you were
to put forward a system that says listen
you're not going to go bankrupt looking
for healthcare that's not what we're
pushing here but you will get a better
quicker product Canadians would be on
board with that but but you have again
this very small group that stands in the
way of that yeah you're you're
completely right uh one thing a lot of
people I don't think realize is that you
know a lot of the opposition to any sort
of Reform or change in the Canan
healthare system a lot of that sort of
fun by sort of special interest groups
like you know Healthcare unions and what
the message that a lot of Canadians are
are not hearing is that you know Canada
is just one country in the world and uh
We've chosen to have a very strict
restrictions on private payment for
Health Care um but you know if you look
at all of Europe they have Universal
Health Care you don't have to pay with
your credit card if you need health care
if you're poor if you're middle class if
you want to access the public system and
most people are getting their healthare
through the public system but they also
have this sort of release valve which is
that they have a private system where if
things aren't working some wealthier
people can go and they can pay to get
health care and that takes pressure off
the public system and the sort of the
proof is in the pudding you know if you
look at all the rankings that look at
outcomes and weight times and even
Equity all all of the European countries
are basically doing better than Canada
so I think we really need to start um
you know pushing back against that that
sacred cow that we can't allow any sort
of private payment in Canada just to
bring the legal context here I I know
the CCF had taken up the long long
running cambi case in in British
Columbia there which I I spoke about I
think it was with I can't remember if it
was with Joanna Baron or Christine vany
or both but when the decision came up
but but as a bit of a primer there how
does that decision stand in the way of
what you and I are are talking about and
Canadians seem to want here well so uh
British Columbia like most provinces has
some restrictions on uh you know doctors
work uh offering private surgeries or
doctors or or uh health insurance and
each province is a little bit different
but the idea is that uh uh Canadians
supposedly want a Government monopoly on
Healthcare and so we've got all of these
restrictions and in that particular case
we said you know if you're waiting on a
waiting list for a surgery and you're in
in physical pain and you could pay to
relieve that but it's just a a law
standing in the the way you know an
arbitrary law that is supposed to
guarantee you uh reasonable access to
healthcare but is actually forcing you
to wait on a wait list uh that's
violating your constitutional rights and
that shouldn't be allowed to stand and
you know there's a 2005 case that found
that to be the case in Quebec but it
doesn't apply in the rest of Canada so
we thought that in British Columbia we
would be successful but the courts there
said no this is a reasonable limit on
people's Charter rights even though
people suffer and in some cases die on
waiting lists and so uh right now it's
uh it's still apparently acceptable to
do this in British Colombia and we don't
really know what the status is in the
rest of the provinces so uh you know
we're always sort of looking for our
next can be case the fight certainly
isn't over well and there I think
underscores how the ideology is getting
in the way of the outcomes here because
you know if someone pays out of pocket
to take themselves off a weight list and
there's an available doctor an available
uh Surgical Center no one is worse off
like absolutely no in fact the public
system is better off because one more
person has come off that weight list
which helps the person behind them so I
I really don't get how you like it's
such an inexplicable decision just not
even looking at the law just on the
logic of
it yeah that's right yeah so so I also
don't understand that like you can look
at for example look at Norway and it's
the country that ranks better than any
other country in uh you know the oecd
for its Health Care outcomes for its
Healthcare equity and it does better on
cost than Canada Canada has a very very
expensive system and you know they have
only about 10% of people there have
private insurance and they get you know
some specialist appointments quicker
they do get some surgeries quicker but
it's optional and 90% of people are
happy with the public system and stay in
that system but just taking that you
know half million Norwegians out of the
public system makes the waiting lists in
the public system shorter for everyone
and you know Norway can actually do a
lot more in their public system because
they're not um because they don't have
to look after 100% of the the population
all the time um an interesting sort of
result from this survey that we did with
Second Street and uh Mei was that
Canadians actually rank pharmacare
extremely low their priority it's it's
like ninth out of nine options only 3%
set as their top priority and that's
because Canada can't seem to figure out
the basics like getting you your family
doctor or uh reasonable ER weight times
uh Norway or they they can afford to
actually do pharmacare uh because they
also allow some sort of private money
into the system so I think it's pretty
clear at this point that uh Canada
system isn't working that it's you know
violating Canadian's constitutional
rights and the survey that we've we've
just done seems to show that the public
is kind of ahead ahead of the the media
and some of the sort of politicians on
this particular topic because Canadians
are ready for change one thing I mean
maybe I I'm I'm a bit of adult so it's
probably easier for you than for me here
but it's navigating this issue of of
what is legal and what is just tradition
has been incredibly difficult I mean
Ontario's a great example of this where
you've got a couple of literally private
hospitals that are there because they've
just been grandfathered in you have
Federal Regulations but healthc care is
provincial and and I think a lot of that
jurisdictional uh ambiguity is used by
politicians that don't want to touch
this issue Pro provincial leaders will
say oh well the federal government
handcuffs us on universal healthcare the
federal government will say oh well
Healthcare is a provincial issue so at
its core if we wanted to to have some
progress on this issue where's the
starting point where's the way into that
is it at Federal level with the core uh
canidate Health act or is it provincial
yeah I think it's actually both uh so
the Canada Health Act is not as clear as
people think it is so just for a little
bit of background I'm glad I'm not alone
in being utterly confused when I look at
it then I was reading about uh certain
aspects of it last night and it's it's
confusing so the basic idea behind the
candada health Act is that the federal
government is going to give provinces
money to spend on Healthcare even though
Healthcare is a provincial jurisdiction
right so uh but to do so Canada in
exchange for that money wants certain um
guarantees from the provinces uh for
example that you know people are not
going to be charged user fees or things
like that but there's so much ambiguity
in it um one really good example is
diagnostic services so uh you know
getting an MRI most of Canada you can
walk into a private Clinic put down your
credit card and get off the public
weight list if you want to by paying for
that MRI well one of the places you
can't do that is Ontario unfortunately
so you know we're stuck going to gatuno
or to Buffalo if we are are worried
about uh being stuck in a wait list so
oh yeah I so I live just on that I live
an hour from Port her on Michigan you
cross the border and billboards
advertising to Canadians you know get
your MRI you know $129 or whatever you
know go here open
247 yeah we we have them I'm in Toronto
and we have them on the subway saying
you know go to Buffalo for all your
surgeries or services but anyway the
point is the the federal government and
the pro provinces don't even seem to
know whether that is supposed to be
covered under the Canada Health Act and
the Trudeau government in 2018 said
suddenly actually you know this should
be uh something that provinces are
required to not only pay for but stop
anyone from buying privately and so in
our opin opinion this is contrary to the
Canada Health act and they started
finding provinces like Quebec and
Alberta and British Columbia just for
allowing people to get out of the public
weight list line go to a private clinic
and pay to have the health care that
they need so there's a lot of ambiguity
and I think you could clarify the Canada
Health act um you know I think it allows
provinces to do a lot more than they say
that it does but there's no reason why
the federal government couldn't clarify
the Canada Health act and say look we're
still going to fund universal healthcare
we're still going to give you just as
much money but we're going to let
provinces innovate to some degree
because the status quo just isn't
working so you know if it was if if I
was in charge i' probably start with
just clarifying that Canada Health act
well yeah there we go and obviously uh
with polling I mean the the cynic and
all all of us as politicians are
responsive to polls more than their core
convictions sometimes so if that's the
case your move political class uh you
can read more about this at the cf. ca
Josh deaz always good to talk to you
thanks for coming on today thanks Andrew
all right thank you uh let me know what
you think I so many Canadians have
absolute horror stories I had
interviewed on the show a few years ago
a woman I want to say she was from Nova
Scotia it was somewhere out east where
she and a friend of hers had started a
company where they literally just were
concierges connecting Canadians who were
having trouble getting Health Care
Services with treatment programs in the
US and and they did incredibly well on
this because there are so many Canadians
that said yeah yeah I want to spend
money and go to the US I just don't know
how to do it and that itself reflects a
pretty big problem with the so-called
Universal offerings in the great white
North all right I said I we'd have some
fun on the end so at the beginning I
started off the show with a couple of
these AI generated uh songs I have not
even listened to this one this is
completely new to me but I asked for a
little bit of a PSA telling you all to
listen to the Andrew lton show and I
wanted it to sound authentically
Canadian so here you
[Music]
go speaking of the East
Co oh where did it
go D you round t a i tell the truth
profound
a show like no other voice Unbound set
sa with and let your minds Sail on sale
to the end of long show where the news
is in the
[Music]
commentary
with
know long like the truth ARS be the
truth arrows be thrown thees of trueth
signal strong he navigates through
thees with irr ands
hee
[Music]
[Applause]
join that part scared me all right tune
in to lotton join his corageous throng
uh don't join my courageous thong by the
way you don't want to be there all right
that does it for us for today we will be
back tomorrow to close out the week here
on Canada's most reverent talk show I
like that the the Andre loton show C
Shanty we'll have I I like our our
current one which was not to my
knowledge AI generated anyway uh we will
talk to you all tomorrow thank you God
bless and good day to you all thanks for
listening to the Andrew Maron show
support the program by donating to True
North at
[Music]
he
a